=====================================
Chapter 2 : Human Health Significance
=====================================

.. sectnum::
  :prefix: 2.

In this chapter, the role diagnostic medical ultrasound plays in addressing
public health needs related to carotid plaque burden are discussed.
Specifically, focus is placed on stroke due to carotid atherosclerotic disease
with increased vessel stenosis or embolization being primary causative factors.
First, the prevalence and pathology of stroke is described.  The
current status of prevention and treatment measures are reviewed.  Current methods
to access stroke risk are reviewed by describing these techniques, the physiological target
they aim to quantify, status of development, and effectiveness.  In this
chapter, focus is placed primarily on imaging methods.  A thorough literature review
describes research efforts in medical ultrasound imaging for carotid plaque
detection and characterization.  Finally, the approach taken in this
dissertation is presented in the context of prior research efforts.



~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Etiology of stroke and the role of atherosclerotic plaque
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Stroke is a disease that effects the most defining and critical organ of the
human body, the brain.  Stroke is a result of prolonged hypoxia to neural tissue
resulting in cell death that can occur because of infarction, hemorrhage, or
subarachnoid hemorrhage [Whisnant1990]_.  Symptoms include compromised movement,
speech, cognition, and death.  Location and extent of neuronal injury determine
the resulting neuronal dysfunction.  While stroke is an acute ischemic
cerebrovascular event with long lasting effects, there are similar ischemic
cerebrovascular pathologies with different time-courses.  For example, transient
ischemic attacks (TIA), usually last from 2-15 minutes.  They result in cerebral
impairment that subsides in under twenty-four hours [Whisnant1990]_.  In
addition, there also may be chronic ischemic events resulting from microemboli
that explain some dementias due to vascular cognitive impairment
[Whisnant1990]_.  According to Hachinski et al., one in three people will
experience stroke or dementia, but twice as many individuals will incur
cognitive impairment to a lesser degree [Hachinski2006]_.  Hachinski reported on
the efforts of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
(NINDS) and the Canadian Stroke Network's (CSN) effort to create a standard way
to identify and report on the degree of cognitive impairment.  Vascular
cognitive impairment is likely to become a productive area of future research
since it has been a largely unrecognized detriment to human health.  Its
widespread presence and increasing importance to quality of life as life
expectancy continues to be prolonged cannot be understated
[Hachinski2006,Hennerici2004]_.  Recent evidence has emerged suggesting that
cerebral emboli may be a cause or accelerator for cognitive decline associated
with Alzheimer's disease [Purandare2006a,Purandare2006,Purandare2007]_.  Some
researchers have termed the Alzheimer's/vascular disease combination as 'mixed
dementia', and it has gained increased recognition as the cause of mild
cognitive impairment observed with aging
[Langa2004,Schneider2009,Deschaintre2009]_.  Mild cognitive impairment, which
may be a precursor to Alzheimer's,  is thought to occur in 10 to 20 percent of
the elderly.  Alzheimer's disease is one of the fastest growing causes of death
in the United States: the number of deaths per year increased by 47% from 2000
to 2006 [AAStats2009]_.  Furthermore, a correlation between migraine and
ischemic stroke has led to the suggestion that embolic ischemia may increase
migraine risk [Zotto2008,Agostoni2007,Schoenen2006]_.  For example, Jesurum et
al. [Jesurum2008]_ found that migraine with aura can be relieved when the source
of ischemia causing emboli, a right-to-left shunt via a patent foramen ovale
(PFO), is closed even partially with surgery.

While the effects of stroke are far reaching, there are only a few basic causes.
The pathogenesis of stroke can be classified into four categories
[Whisnant1990]_, namely: brain hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, intracranial
hemorrhage from an arteriovenous malformation, and brain infarction, which is
also referenced as *ischemic stroke*.  Mechanisms of cerebral infarction are
further divided into subcategories, namely, thrombotic, embolic, and
hemodynamic.  Thrombotic infarction usually occurs with a thrombosis that forms
around an atherosclerotic plaque, which occludes blood flow.  This can occur with the
larger cerebral arteries that possess extensive cerebrovascular disease.

Emboli causing brain infarction can have many origins.  One source of emboli is
the heart.  Cardioembolic stroke can be due to many conditions.  Atrial
fibrillation, recent myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, valve
disease or mechanical valve replacement can result in thrombosis with free
passage to the brain.  Strokes that were previously labeled idiopathic,
paradoxical, or crypotogenic, are now thought to be primarily caused by a patent
foramen ovale (PFO).  A PFO occurs when the shunt in the fetus's atrial septum,
which bypasses circulation to the lungs, fails to close after birth.  A clot
within the shunt or a peripheral venous thrombus that has bypassed the lungs
could then find its way to cerebral tissue [Whisnant1990]_.  Finally,
hemodynamic brain infarctions refer to hypoperfusion due to plaque stenosis or
occlusion.

The stroke pathogenesis targeted in this work are emboli originating
from carotid plaque.  This is one of the more common causes of stroke,
underlying over 50% of strokes [Nikic2006,Rothwell2000]_.  The carotid artery is
the main conduit of blood to the brain.  In humans there is a left and right
common carotid artery (CCA) that bifurcates in the upper neck into the internal
carotid artery (ICA) and the external carotid artery (ECA).  The diameter of the
CCA is typically 0.5 mm although age and atherosclerosis can increase diameter
through remodeling [Eigenbrodt2006]_.  Large muscular arteries are prone to
develop atherosclerosis, and areas of hemodynamic disturbance are inherently
susceptible to atherosclerosis, so plaque invariably develops around the
bifurcation at the carotid bulb.

Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is a surgery performed to reduce the risk of
stroke from carotid atherosclerosis.  It involves accessing the carotid in the
neck near the carotid bulb.  An incision is made longitudinally along the
carotid, the plaque is scraped out, and the surgical site closed.  CEA has been
performed since 1954, and approximately one million surgeries have been
performed between 1974 to 1985 [Barnett1998]_.  Two large scale clinical trials
were performed in the 1990s to test the safety and effectiveness of CEA, namely
the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET), and the
Committee for the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS)
[NASCET1991,ACAS1995,Barnett1998]_.  The metric for stroke risk used during the
trials was the extent of stenosis.  In patients with severe stenosis, defined to
be 70 to 99%, the results demonstrated that CEA had significant ipsilateral
benefit over medical treatment alone.  However, stenosis from 50 to 69% had a
moderate reduction in stroke risk, and there was no significant statistical
benefit for patients with stenosis less than 50%.  It was estimated that for
patients with 50 to 69% stenosis, it took 15 surgeries to prevent one stroke in
a five year period.  Another study from the European Carotid Surgery Trial
concluded that CEA was beneficial in only 16% of patients with 70-99% stenosis.
[Rothwell1999]_

Surgical complications and costs also solicit increased specificity in the
selection of CEA candidates.  In general, CEA has low rates of death and
morbidity, but patients with a history of tobacco use, substantial angina,
contralateral occlusion, or preoperative TIA have elevated risk of complications
[Duncan2008]_.  Most patients with significant carotid plaques are older and
have other symptoms of cardiovascular disease, and the surgical risks must be
weighed carefully.  Yet, stroke is a widespread detriment to public health and
increased sensitivity to stroke risk is desired for appropriate prophylactic
treatments.  The risk factors for stroke are well known and include diabetes,
hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, coronary heart disease, tobacco use, large
artery disease, atrial fibrillation, patent foramen ovale or atrial septal
defect, and cervical artery dissection [Arnold2008]_.  In 2005, 780 thousand new
cases of stroke occurred in the United States [AHAStats2008]_.  There were 150
thousand deaths in the United States during 2004.  While mortality rates have
decreased over the years, morbidity is a public health and financial burden
because of the recovery and rehabilitation required.  Around 5.8 million stroke
survivors are alive today.  It is estimated that the direct medical costs in the
United States due to stroke were $43.7 billion dollars in 2008 [AHAStats2008]_.
Therefore, the most effective method of addressing stroke is prevention.  The
purpose of the proposed research is to develop methods to more effectively
identify and stratify stroke risk from embolic carotid plaque.


~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Clinical carotid ultrasound and plaque characterization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Vulnerable plaque
=================

Vulnerable plaque is defined as ''a plaque which has a high tendency to cause
ischemic events due to cerebral emboli originating from a thrombus on the plaque
surface or from plaque rupture.'' [Kwee2008]_  There have been many hypotheses
presented on the property or properties that make a plaque vulnerable.  These
include a large lipid necrotic core or intraplaque hemorrhage with a thin
overlying fibrous cap, inflammatory infiltrate, and other factors
[Schroeder1996]_.

Morphologically, the appearance of ulceration is also associated with plaque
vulnerability [Groenholdt1999,Park1998]_.  Ulceration is an irregularity in the
surface of the plaque.  In addition to inducing stress concentrations,
ulcerations expose thrombogenic layers of the plaque and provide a surface for
thrombus to develop on.  Another factor that can lead to increased plaque
vulnerability is angiogenesis.  Neoangiogensis refers to the formation of small
blood vessels from the vasa vasorum that result from large and complex
atherogenesis [Lusby1982]_.  These small fissures in the plaque also create
additional stress concentrations.  Plaques that appear heterogeneous in
composition as indicated by ultrasound B-Mode echogenicity are also associated
with amaurosis fugax, TIA, and stroke symptoms
[Groenholdt1999,Langsfeld1989,Pedro2000]_.  Heterogeneity can cause stress
concentrations due to material property distribution discontinuity, similarly to
how ulcerations or neovascularization can cause stress concentrations due to
morphological discontinuities.  Thrombus in the plaque is considered a risk for
future rupture since it not only can result in mechanically weak conditions but
also is a marker of previous rupture events.  Thrombus formation, healing, and
remodeling can be an ongoing process in vulnerable plaques.

Chemical markers of inflammation are also associated with plaque instability
[Kunte2008,Tan2008]_.  These markers are used for the justification and development
of pharmacological treatments such as statins.  These markers tag for macrophage
infiltration, the presence of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and the presence
of inflammation.  Macrophage infiltration plays a role in plaque formation along
with indicating an acute inflammatory response [Wasserman2002,Lendon1991]_.
Buildup of lipids initiates inside macrophages that distend until they cannot escape
into the circulation, forming 'foam cells', and eventually lipid crystals.
Macrophages secrete proteolytic enzymes that weaken the extracellular matrix.
MMP-9 functions as an enzyme that breaks down the extracellular matrix [Loftus2000]_.
As such, it plays a role in weakening the plaque material, which can have a
positive-feedback influence on the presence of MMP-9.  Smooth muscle cells usually
produce extra-cellular collagen that strengthens, though it can also produce the
elastases capesin S or K in diseased intima [Davies1993,Sukhova1998]_.

Finally, while all these factors can make plaques intrinsically vulnerable to
rupture, rupture is caused by extrinsic hemodynamic forces
[Schroeder1996,Wootton1999]_.  Computational finite element analysis has shown
that peak wall shear stress is roughly proportional to flow rate at the carotid
bifurcation in healthy arteries [Younis2003]_.  Cyclic hemodynamic pulse
pressure has been associated with carotid plaque ulceration [Lovett2003]_.
Hypertension, as quantified with central systolic blood pressure, correlates
with ischemia as quantified with fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI
images, where the white matter hyperintensities correlate independently from
carotid plaque score [Shrestha2009]_.  Turbulent flow resulting from severe
stenosis can increase root mean square pressure fluctuations by 3.6 fold when
stenosis increases from 80 to 90% [Loree1991]_.  Hemodynamic forces vary from
patient to patient with hypertension, pulsatility, and turbulence influenced by
the bifurcation and plaque morphology.

All these factors that have been intuitively been associated with plaque
vulnerability are explained formally by a quantity arising from solid mechanics
models of the underlying physical behavior, local stress concentration.  Stress
concentrators have received exhaustive attention in the Materials Science and
Engineering discipline because of their relationship to material failure.  They
define a *stress concentration factor* to be [Hibbeler2000]_

.. math::  K = \frac{\sigma_{max}}{\sigma_{avg}}

The stress concentration factor, :math:`K`, is the maximum stress caused by
the disturbance in uniformity, :math:`\sigma_{max}`, divided by the reference
stress, :math:`\sigma_{avg}`.  This concept is relevant not only to
industrial materials such as metals and ceramics, but biological tissues
including plaque [Meairs1999]_.


Plaque characterization with other methods and imaging modalities
=================================================================

Ultrasound is currently the most common method for plaque investigation because
it is noninvasive, easily accessible, and has a relatively low cost.  While most
prevalent clinically, other methods have a clinical and research role in
determining plaque vulnerability.

Histology
---------

Histological classification of excised
plaques have shown that hemorrhage, ulceration, and lipid rich plaques have an
association with amaurosis fugax, TIA, or stroke. [Groenholdt1999]_ Fresh
thrombi, especially, have a connection with ischemic infarction. [Lusby1982]_
Also, as previously mentioned, inflammatory markers are related to stroke
symptoms.  Histology is the most common gold standard for imaging modalities
that try to determine tissue composition, ulceration, microstructure, and
biochemical markers.

Computed Tomography
-------------------

Angiography is the current gold standard for quantifying stenosis, and the high
resolution is good for identifying ulcerations [NASCET1991,Saba2007]_.  Single
slice computed tomography (CT) has had limited success in carotid plaque
classification [Walker2002]_, but recently multidetector-row computed tomography
(MRCT) have attempted to quantify total plaque volume, calcification, fibrous,
and lipid or hemorrhage areas [Ajduk2008,Saba2008]_.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
--------------------------

High resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has better composition
determination capabilities than MRCT because of the increased soft tissue
contrast [Oikawa2009,Kwee2008,U-King-Im2008,Fabiano2008,Yarnykh2006,Saam2008]_.
This contrast is not only used to identify volume and degree of stenosis but
also provides a noninvasive method to identify components of lipid, fibrous,
calcium, or thrombus.  Relative to the surrounding muscle, calcium appears
hypointense on T\ :sub:`1`\ -weighted, very hypointense on proton-density
weighted, and very hypointense on T\ :sub:`2`\ -weighted images.  Lipids are very
hyperintense on T\ :sub:`1`\ -weighted, hypertense on proton-density weighted,
and hypointense on T\ :sub:`2`\ -weighted images.  Finally, fibrous tissue is
isointense to slightly hyperintense on all three parameter-weighted images.  T\
:sub:`1` shortening causing increased signal intensity is associated with the
protein-water interactions of the extracellular matrix content found in fibrous
tissue.  A short T\ :sub:`2`\ , which causes low signal intensity in T\
:sub:`2`\ -weighted images, is found in primarily lipid areas where there is
increased interaction between free and bound water.  The calcium areas will have
low signal intensity because of low proton density and diffusion-mediated
susceptibility effects.  [Fayad2001]_ The calcium susceptibility and
paramagnetic ferric iron in hemorrhage may alter atherosclerotic appearance in
3.0 T magnets slightly, but the general characteristics still apply from 1.5 T
magnets. [Underhill2008]_  In a study of *ex-vivo* plaque specimens, Fabiano et
al. found that 1.5-T MRI had sensitivities and specificities of 92% and 74% for
the lipid core, 82% and 94% for fibrous tissue, 72% and 87% for fibrous/loose
connective tissue, and 98% and 99% for calcifications [Fabiano2008]_.

The quality of MRI images of the carotid bifurcation will continue to improve as
hardware, excitation sequences, and image processing is modified for this
application.  Balu et al. indicated a 1.7 fold improvement in SNR and larger
coverage with a 8 channel phased array coil at 3T [Balu2009]_.  In a study of 60
patients, high resolution MRI was able to detect greater plaque hemorrhage in
acute symptomatic vs. recently symptomatic vs. asymptomatic patients
[Sadat2009]_.  The application of black-blood MR imaging sequences increases the
detection of ulceration [Yu2009]_.  Even though MRI imaging of composition holds
promise, there is room for improvement: an attempt to correlate plaque
morphology and composition as measured on both arteries of 40 patients did not
find that the MRI images alone could not predict the severity of white matter
ischemia as measured using FLAIR MRI images [Patterson2009]_.

Contrast can be further improved and neovascularization visualized with
contrast-enhanced MRI [Saam2007]_.  Since methemoglobin is associated with
thrombus and hemorrhage and with a shortening of T\ :sub:`1`\ , intraplaque
hemorrhage can be detected with MRI [Moody2003]_.  Another thrombus detecting
MRI agent is the fibrin targeted peptide EP-2104R. [Sirol2005]_ Thrombus age can
be inferred from T\ :sub:`1`\ -weighted or T\ :sub:`2`\ -weighted signal
intensity, although thrombus generally has better T\ :sub:`1` intensity.
[Corti2002]_ The gadolinium-based MRI contrast agent P947 MMPs may be a tool for
detecting plaque inflammation [Lancelot2008]_.

Another MRI functional imaging approach is strain imaging.  The technique used
to calculate displacements in MR strain imaging is similar to the technique used to
calculate blood velocity in phase-contrast magnetic resonance angiography.
Dephasing that occurs during a bipolar gradient is proportional to the
displacements of the tissue.  Early work studied the porcine aorta and found
that when displacements estimated were compared to fiducial markers on the
luminal wall, a strain of 10% would have a standard deviation of error of 3.6%
[Draney2004]_.  In a study of *ex-vivo* porcine aortas comparing a control group
to renovascular hypertension group, it was found that the Young's Modulus-wall
thickness product, derived from MR strain images, differentiated the
hypertensive group because of the increassed wall stiffness [Woodrum2009]_.
Lin et al. used a displacement encoding with stimulated echoes
(DENSE) pulse sequence to get the circumferencial strain of the carotid artery
[Lin2008]_.  High temporal resolution is obtained by utilizing steady-state
free-precession (SSFP) along with high in-plane resolution, 0.6 mm.  Good
repeatability was seen between acquisitions at 1.5 T and 3 T.  Changes in
circumferential strain can even be observed in the aorta of a murine model of
atherosclerosis when high field strength MRI is applied [Herold2009]_.

Nuclear imaging
---------------

Plaque inflammation is targeted in many of the newer nuclear imaging techniques
[Chen2005]_.  :sup:`18`\ F-FDG PET detects the increased glycolytic activity of
inflammatory cells. [Rominger2009,Tawakol2006,Rudd2002]_  SPECT imaging can be
performed to trace oxidized low density lipoproteins (\ :sup:`99m`\ Tc-LDL), or
apoptosis (\ :sup:`99m`\ Tc-annexin A5).
[Lees1988,Virgolini1992,Boersma2005,Kietselaer2004]_  Annovazzi et. al. have
attempted to use :sup:`99m`\ Tc-IL2 scintigraphy to detect chronic inflammatory
response indicated by T-cell and macrophage activation as a marker for Crohn's
disease [Annovazzi2003]_.  :sup:`111`\In platelet scintigraphy is sensitive to
thrombosis, but it cannot distinguish other tissue types [Manca2001]_.

Thermal
-------

Increased metabolic activity associated with inflammation can be detected with a
needle thermistor, although this requires interrogation with a catheter, which
is an invasive procedure.  Inflammation is associated with thrombosis generation
on both ruptured and non-ruptured surfaces [Casscells1996]_.  In a study of 50
CEA samples, Casscells et al. found that some plaques have focal regions that
are warmer by 0.4-2.2 ºC, and they can be very close to one another, less than 1
mm apart [Casscells1996]_.  Increased cell density correlated with macrophage
cell density and proximity to the luminal surface.  In general, the thermal
profile is heterogenous.  Temperature is also found to be higher in areas where
local pH is lower, and it is inversely correlated with smooth muscle cell
density [Madjid2002]_.

There are two methods to measure temperature variations *in vivo*: a thermistor
and infrared means.  A thermistor placed at the tip of a catheter must come into
direct contact with tissue's luminal surface.  A fiber-optic cable in a
catheter can transmit infrared energy that indicates local temperature.  In both cases, blood
flow may redistribute local spikes in temperature [Kim2008]_.

Optical
-------

There have been a variety of optical techniques that have demonstrated
diagnostic capabilities, which measure various optical characteristics. Like
thermal methods, these methods require interrogation with a catheter because
they generally have lower penetration than the other imaging modalities.  On the
other hand, they have higher resolution than other modalities, which is
important for such small tissue volumes.

Intravascular optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a catheter based method that
provides limited penetration, but very high resolution, on the order of 10 μm
axially and 20 μm laterally [Yabushita2002]_.  Sensitivity and specificity rates
for composition classification range from 71% and 79% to 97% and 98%
[Yabushita2002]_.  Lipid and necrotic core have low optical attenuation, while
fibrous and calcified tissue have a higher attenuation [VanSoest2009]_.

Time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy (TRFS) is another optical technique that
is used in conjunction with intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)
[Stephens2009,Marcu2005]_.  Anatomical guidance is provided by IVUS which is
registered with the TRFS signal.  TRFS detects autofluorescence from elastic,
collagen, lipids, and by-products of inflammatory processes to characterize the
local biochemical composition.

A method that focuses on collagen content is polarization-sensitive OCT (PSOCT)
[Nadkarni2009]_.  Many different types of collagen fibers, primarily Type I and
Type III, provide the majority of tensile strength and elasticity in healthy
arteries [Plenz2003]_.  While smooth muscle cells migrate from the media to the
intima in order to increase extracellular collagen during atherosclerosis, MMPs cause
proteolysis of the collagen and apoptosis of intimal smooth muscle cells
resulting in a net loss of collagen content [Newby1999]_.  In addition to high
resolution plaque microstructure from OCT, PSOCT measures tissue birefringence.
This behavior manifests itself as changes in back-reflected intensity when
polarized light passes through anisotropic material such as organized collagen
or smooth muscle cell actin-myosin in atherosclerotic plaque [Nadkarni2009]_.

Laser speckle is generally considered a source of noise in optical imaging, but
the time-dependent characteristics of the speckle are targeted in laser speckle
imaging (LSI) [Nadkarni2009]_.  Speckle will change because of Brownian motion of suspended
particles in the tissue.  The motility of particles depends on the viscoelastic
properties of the medium, which is related to plaque vulnerability.  Images
related to local viscoelastic properties are made by quantifying the speckle
decorrelation time constant.

Raman spectroscopy is a method that measures the weak scattered signal from a
laser light that shifts in frequency due to interactions with characteristic
molecular vibrations and rotations [Hanlon2000]_.  Spectra provide a chemical
footprint of biochemical composition.  Recent developments of optical fiber
technology and small diameter probes with sufficient filtering capabilities
allows real-time *in vivo* acquisition [Motz2006]_.  The sensitivity
and specificity rates for determining carotid and femoral plaque composition
were found to be 79% and 85%, respectively [Motz2006]_.  Near-infrared (NIR)
spectroscopy is similar to Raman spectroscopy, but investigates the absorbance
at wavelengths from 400 to 2400 nm [Lerakis2008]_.  The defining characteristics
of tissue components in these situations can be determined empirically by
applying a histology-based training set on principle component analysis or other
methods to components of the spectra [Moreno2002]_.

Finally, OCT elastography can generate strain images of vascular tissue
[Chan2004]_.  Unlike MRI strain imaging but similar to ultrasound strain
imaging, discussed later, OCT elastography is essentially a deformable image
registration problem [Chan2004,Kirkpatrick2006,Karimi2008]_.  Again, a clear
advantage of OCT is the resolution for profiling these small inhomogenous
tissues.  In fact, the precision of OCT is so high, that deformation in the skin
due to pressure waves in the audible range has been imaged [Adie2009]_.  While
resolution is more ideal than other modalities, depth of penetration may limit
application to coronary plaques and preclude carotid plaques.  On the other
hand, if behavior proximal to the lumen proves to be the area of
diagnostic interest, the depth of penetration would be sufficient.


Plaque characterization with diagnostic ultrasound
==================================================

B-Mode intensity and textural features
--------------------------------------

Vulnerability assessment with ultrasound focuses on many of the same parameters
examined using other modalities such as MRI.  Stenosis is currently assessed
with Doppler velocity measurements, along with color-flow and B-mode imaging.
After measuring peak systolic velocity, end-diastolic velocity, and pre and
post-stenotic ratios, a percent stenosis can be implied based on these
measurements [Koelemay1996,Wardlaw2006,Arbeille1999]_.  Many radiologists also
try to access the plaque through visual inspection of the B-mode images.
Echolucent plaque are considered more vulnerable because lipid and hemorrhage
are often echolucent.
[Groenholdt1997,Groenholdt1999,ECPSG1995,Pedro2000,Ohki1998,Polak1998]_ In
contrast, homogeneous calcification is thought to cause plaque stabilization
[Avril1991]_.  While calcified tissue is usually echogenic, fibrous plaque can
also be echolucent.  Additionally, shadowing and other effects can make
echogenicity difficult to interpret.  Nonetheless, echogenicity has been the
most commonly tested and most widely used metric of vulnerability.  Ultrasound
echogenicity is assessed via direct visual examination of B-mode images.  Some
authors prefer to use the Gray-Weale scale for echogenicity which stratifies
echogenicity into five types ranging from echolucent to calcific with shadowing
[Gray-Weale1988]_. A slight improvement to visual examination are
computer-assisted gray-scale median (GSM) measurements
[Sztajzel2005,Aly2000,Lal2002]_.  These results are semi-quantitative since they
rely on the settings and properties of the ultrasound scanning device.  Plaque
intensities are normalized to intraluminal blood and adventitia.  When the
definition of thresholds and regions of interest is forced and quantitative
intensity measurements are made, objectivity is increased [Lal2006]_.
Additionally, the quality of B-mode images have recently been improved with
angular compounding [Kern2004]_.

More sophisticated analysis of B-mode properties focuses on factors other than
local intensity, broadly termed 'texture analysis'.  Texture analysis has the
aim of differentiating tissue composition and properties
[Christodoulou2003,Coleman2005,Lee1998,Madycki2006,Stoitsis2006]_.  Texture
analysis examines statistical parameters of the intensity, Fourier spectrum,
Wavelet Transform, or other quantities in a local area, and statistical
techniques are applied to empirically determine which parameters may
differentiate tissue composition.

Morphologically, the appearance of ulceration is also associated with
vulnerability [Groenholdt1999]_.  Ulcerations are irregularities on the plaque
surface.  In a study monitoring patients over 6.2 years on 1,091 plaques, it was
found that these irregularities or ulcerations increased stroke risk with a
2.7:1 hazard ratio [Prabhakaran2006]_.  Resolution and two dimensional imaging
limitations with *in vivo* ultrasound make it difficult to consistently
evaluate ulceration.  It is more difficult to detect ulceration for plaques
with increased stenosis.  By comparing with results from histology, it was
found that for plaque with >50% stenosis, the sensitivity for direct
ulceration detection was only 41% [ECPSG1995]_.  However, the use of
microbubble contrast agents improve surface definition by increasing contrast
at the lumen border where it may otherwise be compromised by partial-volume
effects [Kono2004]_.

Neoangiogenesis in large plaques also plays a role similar to ulceration as
mechanical stress concentrators.  Unlike surface ulcerations, neoangiogenesis
compromises the tissue at a deeper level, making large ruptures more likely.
These tiny vessels were previously undetectable with ultrasound, and they may
now be visible when contrast agents are applied [Coli2008,Kaufmann2009]_.
Harmonic imaging of microbubbles allows visualization the vasa vasorum in
atherosclerotic rabbit models [Goertz2006]_.  In the future, ultrasound
molecular imaging of atherosclerosis may be performed by targeting markers for
neoangiogenesis or inflammation with microbubbles, acoustically active
nanoparticles, or microparticles like echogenic liposomes [Kaufmann2009]_.

Radiofrequency signal based characterization
--------------------------------------------

Quantitative ultrasound tissue characterization attempt to improve on
simple B-mode texture analysis by removing system dependent features from an
image to isolate tissue characteristics in the image [Lizzi1983]_.  These images attempt
to show tissue properties that influence ultrasound propagation and scattering
while removing effects such as the geometry and material makeup of the
transducer or electronics of the imaging machine.  This removes the burden of
accounting for system effects from the observer and allows calculation at a
precision equal to the precision of digitization instead of being limited to the
dynamic range of the human eye.  There are many aspects of ultrasound
propagation and scattering, and the parameter to be measured and
displayed can be chosen to elucidate a single aspect of the physics of acoustic
propagation, such as the attenuation coefficient or effective scatterer size or
density, or a combination of multiple aspects.  Determining the most appropriate
parameters depends on the ability to generate accurate and precise estimates of
the parameter and on the amount of correlation between the parameter and the tissue
state of interest.  A parameter is most desireable if there is high contrast
between healthy and diseased tissue states, the parameter can be estimated with
a high signal-to-noise ratio, and an image of the parameter has sufficient
resolution to distinguish the structures present.

Various tissue characterization parameters have been utilized for plaque
examination, including backscattered spectral slope, midband fit, intercept,
minimum and maximum powers and their frequencies in the resulting spectra, along
with the integrated backscatter, and attenuation slope parameters
[Wilson1994,Lockwood1991,Bridal1997a,Bridal2000,Waters2003,Sano2006,Watson2000,Noritomi1997,Nair2001,Spencer1997a,Katouzian2008,Wickline1993]_.
For example, lipid infiltrated and calcified tissue have a higher attenuation
than fibrous plaque [Bridal1998, Bridal1997, Hoskins2007]_.  Also, integrated
backscatter increases in magnitude from thrombic to lipidic to fibrous to
calcified atherosclerotic plaques [Katouzian2008, Kawasaki2002, Waters2003]_.
Additional parameters can be obtained through high frequency texture analysis
[Stoitsis2006]_ or simple integrated backscatter calculations [Sano2006,
Wickline1993]_.  However, the quantities obtained in these methods is dependent
on the machine and acquisition settings [Bridal1998, Ota1997]_.  Volcano
Corporation has released a clinically available IVUS tissue characterization
system they call Virtual Histology [Koenig2007]_.  Their system measures local
spectral parameters that have been statistically classified into tissue types to
label tissue areas. S. Lori Bridal performed high-frequency plaque
characterization with some of the most rigorous attention towards quantitative
parameter estimation.   Early work examined normal and atherosclerotic aorta *in
vitro* [Bridal1996,Bridal1997a,Bridal1997]_.  Different quantities were
examined: apparent integrated backscatter, attenuation slope, and attenuation at
37.5 MHz [Bridal1997a]_.  Integrated backscatter was highest for calcified
regions and was significantly higher for collagen-lipidic and lipidic regions
relative to normal media and dense collagen [Bridal1997]_.  In following work on
excised carotid plaques, Bridal suggested that discriminant analysis which
incorporates multiple parameters, integrated backscatter, frequency dependence
of backscatter, integrated attenuation and slope of attenuation, may be a more
effective classifier than any single parameter [Bridal2000]_.

Most of the ultrasonic tissue characterization methods on atherosclerotic plaque
have used the method introduced by Lizzi to account for system
characteristics [Lizzi1983]_.  In this method, a flat reflector, often made of acrylic or
steel, is placed at various distances in front of the transducer, and the
returned signal is recorded.  The spectra received is used to normalize the
spectra obtained from the region of interest in tissue.

While this is an improvement, there are still inaccuracies inherent to the
system approximation.  The measurement is made in water, which does not exhibit
scattering throughout the beam path as would occur in vivo, and water does not
have the same attenuation properties as tissue.  Furthermore, it relies on good
alignment between the transducer and reflector, which is increasingly difficult
at higher frequencies.  Reference phantom based methods have been developed that
ameliorate many of these inadequacies [Yao1990]_.  In this method, the signal from a
reference phantom with well characterized properties is used in the spectral
normalization instead of that of a flat reflector.  The reference phantom method
has been attempted at low frequencies on carotid plaques [Shi2007, Waters2003]_, but has yet
to be evaluated at higher frequencies.  At lower frequencies, the small volume
and heterogeneity of the tissue makes spectral estimation difficult.


Acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) imaging
-----------------------------------------------

An emerging ultrasound imaging technology is acoustic radiation force impulse
(ARFI) imaging [Nightingale2002]_.  In this technique, a high-intensity acoustic
impulse of short duration (0.03-1 ms) generates localized displacements in the
tissue, which is is tracked with diagnostic pulse-echo signals following the
pushing pulse [Allen2011]_.  The magnitude and time course of the displacement
reflects the local mechanical environment.  Preliminary results by Allen et. al.
using an clinical external ultrasound transducers indicate that the magnitude of
the ARFI displacement can be used to differentiate plaque composition
[Allen2011]_.


Strain imaging
--------------

Motivation
~~~~~~~~~~

The interaction of morphology, composition, and pulse pressures can lead to high
stress states, but the instability depends on mechanical system configuration as
a whole [Li2006,Li2007a,Li2007,Li2008,Hatsukami1997,Imoto2005,Tang2005a]_.  P.D.
Richardson performed seminal work examining this hypothesis, and he points out
that rupture is a result of structural mechanics, fluid mechanics, plaque
morphology, plaque micromechanical material properties, and MMPs
[Richardson2002,Richardson1989]_.  For example, large lipid pools can cause
mechanical stresses, but these stresses are much more significant when the pool
is closer to the lumen [Lal2006,Bassiouny1997]_.  D.L. Tang has created 2D and
3D fluid-structure interaction (FSI) based finite element analysis using MRI and
IVUS based morphology and composition information [Tang2008,Yang2009]_.  From
this model, vulnerability is graded according to a computational plaque
stress index based on the maximum principal stress [Tang2009]_.  Tang's
research has shown that plaque wall stress was 126% higher in 5 ruptured
plaques compared to 7 non-ruptured plaques for 12 patients that underwent CEA
in one study and was found to have an 85% agreement rate with
histopathological analysis in a second study  [Tang2009a,Tang2005]_.  These
studies also verify that markers traditionally considered for vulnerability
such as morphology and composition also increase local stress/strain
[Tang2005a]_.  Similarily, Kock et al. found that MRI derived FSI models of
carotid plaque showed elevated first principal stresses at areas of notorius
risk [Kock2008]_.  These FEA studies are not limited to IVUS and MRI
microstructure inputs; an OCT microstructure and and composition derived model
has shown stress extrema at locations known for rupture [Chau2004]_.  In a
sophisticated FEA model derived from 3D IVUS coronary images, Yang et al.
found that "cyclic bending, anisotropic material properties, pulsating
pressure, plaque structure, and axial stretch may affect critical
stress/strain values in coronary plaques from 40% to 400% or more, depending
on morphology, location, and contributing factors" [Yang2009]_.  Trivedi
reached similar conclusions in an MR imaging-based computational analysis of
5 symptomatic and 5 asymptomatic patients: principal shear stress was higher
in symptomatic plaques than in asymptomatic plaques [Trivedi2007]_.  Ohayon
et al. used a FEA model generated from IVUS images taken during a coronary
angioplasty procedure [Ohayon2001]_.  Morphology from
an unloaded vessel state was obtained by injecting ATP, which caused a brief
atrioventricular block.  Locations of peak circumferential tensile stress
were compared to locations of plaque rupture cause by the angioplasty, and
they were found to correspond.  In another case study, high shear stress was
associated with the rupture and ulceration of a carotid artery plaque on an
individual that had received serial MRI imaging.  Computational fluid
dynamics base on MRI structure and composition identified the location of
high shear stress with the location of the ulcer [Groen2008]_.  Ulceration
has been observed to be more common proximal to stenosis and more common for fatty
plaques [Saba2007]_.

Inflammation may be part of a positive feedback process where mechanical tearing
would stimulate a necrotic response that catabolizes the extracellular matrix,
leading to further mechanical weakness at the site
[Sirico2009,Lendon1993,Arroyo1999,Dhume2003,Ho2002,Lee1998,Lendon1991]_.  This
is supported by a recent study comparing gene expression in calcific areas,
often associated with stability, to non-calcific areas.  It was found
that gene expression of factors that promote interleukin 8 and monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1, associated with inflammation and thereby
vulnerability, were higher in non-calcified areas [Wahlgren2009]_.  Lee et al.
performed a mechanical finite element analysis simulation using the morphology
of 12 unruptured human coronary lesions and assumed appropriate mechanical
material properties for the tissue components.  When comparing images of
immunoreactive MMP-1, they found that high stress regions had twice the MMP-1 expression
as low stress regions [Lee1996]_.  Elevated levels of highly sensitive
C-reactive protein, another inflammation marker, correlates with increased
intima-media thickness [Benbir2005]_.  These high stress states may lead to
fatigue failure [Bank2000,Bauters2002,Cheng1993]_.

Stress-stretch curves ([Holzapfel2004]_ Fig. 6) were created by Holzapfel during
a tensile test on diseased intima sectioned from cadaver iliac arteries.  As the
graphs progresses from the origin, the stretch and stress is increased on the
tissue until the tissue fractures at the curve's termination.  The point in the
curve farthest from the origin defines the stretch at which failure occurs,
ultimate tensile stretch λ\ :sub:`ult`, and the stress at which failure
occurs, ultimate tensile stress, σ\ :sub:`ult`.

Many of the atherosclerosis diagnostic imaging techniques discussed focus on
imaging of plaque composition, which determines the elastic modulus.  While the
distribution of material properties certainly affects stress and strain state,
the sensitivity of stress and strain at the site of rupture in a diseased artery
can be low.  In a computational analysis, it was found that +/- 50% variation in
elastic modulus leads to less than a 10% change in stress at the site of rupture
[Williamson2003]_.  In contrast, strain imaging has the potential to directly image the
parameter of interest.

Recently, ultrasonic strain imaging techniques have been applied to imaging of
the carotid arteries.  Strain imaging creates an *in vivo* map of strain, a
parameter directly related to tissue stretch or contraction, drawn on the
abscissa in the mechanical tests in [Holzapfel2004]_.  Vulnerable plaques have a
higher extensibility and a lower ultimate stress [Lendon1991,Holzapfel2004]_.
Therefore, strain imaging directly measures a parameter that determines how
close a plaque is to failure [Tang2005]_.  This contrasts with other
characterization methods that focus on parameters like composition, which may
affect strain in a secondary manner and may be system dependent.  Strain imaging
directly measures the effect of multiple stress concentrators including
composition, ulceration, morphology, neovascularization, and hemodynamics.

IVUS strain imaging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most of the initial arterial strain imaging studies were performed with IVUS by
de Korte [deKorte1997,Carlier2002,Cespedes2000,Korte2000]_.  IVUS imaging
differs from external ultrasound transducers in its insonification routine--
IVUS transducers are placed in a small catheter and a set of A-lines are emitted
radially as the transducer is mechanically rotated or electronically steered.
The high frequencies in IVUS, from 20 MHz to 60 MHz, provide higher resolution
images but lower penetration, and it is more common to find it applied to
coronary arteries.  Shapo et al. reported IVUS strain measurements *in vivo*
where strain was incurred with an angioplasty balloon [Shapo1996]_.  De Korte
reported on strain measurements with IVUS on tissue-mimicking phantoms by
performing one-dimensional correlation with peak interpolation [deKorte1997]_.
Adaptive and iterative estimation of local scaling factors has been added to
simple one-dimensional cross-correlation techniques [Brusseau2001]_.  Two
dimensional correlation windows were utilized by Shapo et al. [Shapo1996]_ and
Ryan and Foster [Ryan1997]_, with phase sensitive analysis and phase insensitive
analysis performed by the former and latter.  Maurice et al. applied his motion
tracking algorithm, the Lagrangian speckle model estimator (LSME)
[Maurice2008]_.  Instead of block-matching techniques, Wan et al.  applied an
optical flow method to estimate tissue motion [Wan2001]_.  Liang et al. applied
a Levenberg-Marquardt nonlinear minimization technique to a cubic B-spline model
of displacement governed by a cost function that contained terms for intensity
fidelity, a sum of squared difference, and strain smoothness, a sum of strain
gradients [Liang2008]_.

The feasibility of *in vivo* application was examined on 12 patients undergoing
angioplasty, and it was found that strain in calified material (0.20% +/- 0.07)
was smaller than non-calcified tissue (0.51% +/- 0.20) [DeKorte2002]_.  During
that study, it was revealed that catheter movement due to cardiac motion and
blood flow impede strain estimation, so strain estimation was gated to points in
late diastole.  Catheter movement with blood flow can make it difficult to
determine the orientation of the transducer and to differentiate between
catheter and artery movement, although movement compensation schemes have been
described [DeKorte1999,Shi2005b]_.  In the technique described by Shapo et al.,
motion is constrained with the angioplasty ballon, but strains are also measured
relative to an artery's geometric center that is calculated from segmentation of
the lumen [Shapo1996]_.  Schaar et al. described the effectiveness of what they
termed palpography, an elastogram that only investigates the first 450 μm at the
lumen boundary since this is where rupture may occur [Schaar2006]_.  Comparison
of mean strain values and histology revealed higher strain colocalized with
fatty areas and areas with increased concentration of macrophages
[DeKorte2000]_.  In a study of 54 cross sections validated by history,
palpography was found to have a sensitivity of 88% and a specifity of 89% [Schaar2003]_.
In a study of an atherosclerotic Yucantan minipig, it was found
that mean strain correlated with tissue type and localized high strain values
correlated with indicators of inflammation, macrophages [DeKorte2002a]_.  The
nature of IVUS acquisition results in 2D images of the vessel cross-section, but
catheter pullback methods can be performed to generate a 3D profile of plaques
that are typically spatially variant [Schaar2004]_.  In the 2004 study by Schaar
et al., it was found the that number of deformable plaque locations had a
negative correlation with the stability of angina and a positive correlation
with the level of C-reactive protein, a marker of inflammation [Schaar2004]_.

Thermal strain imaging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A slightly different approach is thermal strain imaging, which has recently been
examined as a method for characterizing plaque composition [Shi2005,Kim2008b]_.
Strain in the ultrasound signal is a result of the tissue's coefficient of
thermal expansion and the change in sound speed that occurs with temperature.
Temperature changes on the order of 1º C can be detected [Shi2005]_.  The
temperature change is induced by microwave radiation or ultrasound energy
absorption.  In the study by Kim et al., ultrasound signal motion tracking with
a high frequency (50 MHz) transducer was employed to monitor ultrasound induced
thermal expansion on *in vitro* tissue [Kim2008b]_.  Yet, it remains to be seen
how this technique can be applied *in vivo* where tissue movement, from both
bulk motion and mechanical strain, is significant [Shi2005a]_.

The thermal strain effect was used to estimate the spatio-temporal temperature
changes that occur with another plaque characterization imaging technique,
photoacoustic imaging [Sethuraman2008]_.  During intravascular photoacoustic
imaging (IVPA), tissue is irradiated with a sub-ablation threshold laser at
20 Hz [Sethuraman2005a]_.  Optical absorption of the laser energy results in
thermoelastic expansion of the tissue and acoustic waves.  The acoustic waves
are detected with an IVUS transducer, and a spatial map of optical absorption is
reconstructed.  This method allows for imaging at optical resolutions but with a
depth of penetration that is closer to ultrasound.  By exciting tissue with
multiple wavelengths in the 680 - 900 nm range, the absorption properties across
a spectrum can be used to differentiate fibrous and lipid plaque components
[Sethuraman2008a]_.

External transducer strain imaging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Recently, strain imaging with external ultrasound imaging using linear array
transducers has been attempted.
While the resolution of external ultrasound is much lower, it is noninvasive and
appropriate for general stroke risk screening purposes.

The first plaque strain characterization based on an external
clinical transducer, a 7.0 MHz Acuson linear array, was reported by Meairs and
Hennerici in 1999 [Meairs1999]_.  While the bulk of research in this area ensued
5 years following, the quality of the Meairs and Hennerici paper supercedes
later work.  4D *in vivo* characterization was performed on carotid artery
plaques of 23 asymptomatic and 22 symptomatic patients by scanning the linear
array with an ECG gated stepper motor.  The motion estimator was a hierarchical
algorithm applied to laplacian filtered images that minimized a sum-of-squared
differences cost function with the Gauss-Newton method.  They found that even
though no significant differences in echogenicity or surface structure between
symptomatic and asymptomatic cases could be found, symptomatic plaques
demonstrated inherent plaque movement relative to asymptomatic plaques.  Meairs
evaluated two parameters: maximal surface velocity (MSV) and maximal discrepant
surface velocity (MDSV).  They found that MSV, which is termed local
displacement in other literature that does not account the inter-frame time
period, did not have significant differences between symptomatic and
asymptomatic cases.  In contract, MDSV, which is is termed local strain in other
literature, did show a statistically significant difference between symptomatic
and asymptomatic patients.

Later, Bang et al. implemented a motion tracking algorithm similar to what is
found in the elastography literature [Ophir2000, Ophir2001]_, though they
appeared to be unaware of that body of literature [Bang2003,Dahl2004]_.  That
is, a 2D cross correlation is calculated between small windows of tissue at
frames contigious in time for different translations of the window.  The local
displacement is assumed to correspond to the translation with highest
correlation.  The precision of the correlation function can be improved with
interpolation of the correlation matrix.  Their images appeared to be quite
noisy, and the fidelity of their method can not be determined because there was
not rigorous validation.  However, they commented on a few challenges that exist
in the image analysis.  First, the selection of optimal correlation window size
is required for good performance.  Second, a low framerate results in
significant out-of-plane motion that diminishes tracking performance.

Kanai et al. performed regional plaque displacement tracking in longitudinal
plane images with the phase tracking method used by Kanai in cardiac strain
applications [Kanai2003,Kanai1996,Kanai1997]_.  This method was tauted for
having a precision of approximately 0.5 μm observed with a rubber plate in a
water tank [Kanai2003]_.

Recent efforts working towards noninvasive strain estimation come from The
University of Montreal and Montreal Hospital, Quebec.  They call their motion
tracking algorithm the Lagrangian speckle model estimator (LSME)
[Maurice2004a,Maurice2005]_.  The algorithm is similar to the approach by taken
by Meairs: local motion is formulated as an non-linear minimization problem
where the cost function is a sum of squared difference in intensity.  The
optimization algorithm utilized in this case is the Levenberg-Marquardt method
instead of the Gauss-Newton method, and this motion model is a full affine
transform instead of a simple translation.  The translation portion of the
problem is determined by peaking 2D cross-correlation, while determining tho
parameters of the linear transformation (scaling, rotation, and shearing) matrix
is treated as a nonlinear optimization problem.  In order for the model to
incorporate decorrelation noise in their model, they have tried adding
brightness offset and contrast parameters to the affine model [Schmitt2007]_.
They have also used an optical flow approach [Maurice2005a]_.  Unlike other
methods where strains are calculated from the contrast in displacements of
adjacent tracking points, strains are calculated from components of the linear
transformation matrix of a single tracking point.  Their method was applied to
16 subjects without carotid atherosclerosis binned into four age categories,
[40-49], [50-59], [60-69], and [70-79] years old.  While they were able to
obtain reproducibility between left and right carotid and scanning from two
independent radiologists, a statistically significant difference was not
observed across age groups [Maurice2008a]_.

The de Korte group from the Netherlands, whose efforts were previously focused on
IVUS strain imaging, as described earlier, has recently forayed into the
non-invasive strain imaging area [Ribbers2007]_.  A 2-D cross-correlation motion
tracking technique was applied to a cylindrical phantom and some *in vivo* test
cases.  A challenge noted in transverse images of the vessel mimicking phantom
was the refraction artifact that occurs in this configuration.  The speed of
sound change coupled with the curvature of the artery's inner wall redirects
propagation of the ultrasound beam.  Observed motion distal to the lumen-artery
interface can then actually be due to movement of the lumen-artery interface
instead of local tissue, or the refracted signal may not return to the
transducer, which makes motion tracking a challenge.

Recently, Shi et al. from our laboratory presented preliminary results from
diagnostic characterization of carotid endarterectory patients with strain
imaging [Shi2008]_.  A hierachical 2D cross-correlation method was used for
motion tracking.  The results indicted tho strain values correlated with
calcific and non-calcific B-Mode presentation and that strain indices may
differentiate symptomatic and asymptomatic cases.

Angular compounding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Quality in ultrasound strain images can potentially be improved with angular
compounding [Rao2006]_.  Angular compounding is achieved by electronically
steering the ultrasound beam with appropriate time delays applied to
transducer array elements during the transmit pulse.  In B-Mode angular
compounding, this gives a different instantiation of tissue speckle, which in
can be averaged to improve image quality.  In strain imaging, a different
realization of tissue scattering is again made available, but the observation
of the strain tensor is also obtained in a different coordinate system.  This is
advantageous since ultrasound image resolution in inherently highly anisotropic:
resolution is inherently high along the axis of beam propation, but low lateral
to beam propagation.  As result, the quality of displacement estimates in the axial
direction are better than the lateral direction.  Angular compounding has the
potential to improve image quality with an averaging effect, but also provides
axial quality motion tracking when the beam is steered to what is the lateral
direction when the beam is not steered.

Preliminary work on applying angular compounding to strain images on transverse
images of a hollow cylinder phantom have been performed by Hansen et al.
[Hansen2009]_.  A number of complications exist that question whether angular
compounding of strain images of extensive carotid atherosclerosis *in vivo* will
improve image quality.

First, there are practical limitations to the maximum angle that can be steered
due to transducer technology.  Grating lobe artifacts, which signifantly
decrease image quality, will appear if the spacing between array elements is not
small enough for a given excitation frequency and steering angle.  As a
consequence, steering angles on current high frequency linear array transducers
are limited to approximately +/- 15º.  Hansen et al. worked around this
limitation to some extent by low pass filtering the signal at higher angles with
a cutoff frequency corresponding to the frequency when grating lobes occur.
This allowed them to steer up to +/- 45º without significant artifact, but the
removal of high frequency content decreases the advantage of tracking in the
axial direction.

Secondly, the combination of multiple images may introduce more noise than
signal in the composite image.  The noise may be introduced by multiple factors.
Averaging strains with a simple arithmetic mean of axial and lateral components
may decrease quality in areas that were previously calculated with only the
lateral component.  Artifacts, such as the artifact due to refraction of the
pulse at the curved arterial borders [Ribbers2007]_, may be compounded
[Hansen2009]_.  How strain components are calculated and extracted from the
strain tensor also plays a roll.  Additional noise is introduced if an approach
is taken such as that in Hansen et al., where the strain matrix is rotated
to a particular orientation, and components are average at that orientation.
This is because the orientation may not be the same in all compounded images.
For example, if prinicipal components (eigenvalues of the strain matrix) are
averaged, they do not necessarily correspond to the same coordinate system
orientation (eigenvectors of the strain matrix).  It is natural to try to
extract 'radial' and 'circumferential' components of the strain tensor when
dealing with a transverse view of an artery, because these correspond to the
direction of the principal components for a simple cylinder.  However,
determination of the radial and circumferential directions introduce additional
noise since the center of the lumen is used as a reference [Hansen2009]_ or
the local curvature at the luman-artery interface [Lin2008]_ must be determined
for each image.  Furthermore, radial and circumferential directions are not very
meaningful when dealing with the structure of a complex plaque as opposed to a
healthy artery.  Most importantly, it remains to be determined if registration
and displacement compensation techniques are effective for the significant motion
that occurs *in vivo*.

Even though strain imaging holds much promise in the detection of vulnerable
plaque, its success depends on the ability to measure strain accurately, with a
large dynamic range, and with minimal noise.  The research presented in this
dissertation focuses on the development of improved strain imaging algorithms
and techniques and applies them to the diagnosis of stroke risk due to carotid
plaque disruption.


~~~~~~~~~~
References
~~~~~~~~~~

